## Introduction

As an essential element of out society, transportation is ubiquitous in our daily life. With the advancements in digitalization, new intelligent transportation systems(ITS) such as car-hailing and autonomous vehicles(AV)  are reshaping our life in positive ways. However, they also impose increasing burden to the transportation system besides the growth of cities. In the course of their ever-growing complexity, the transportation systems nowadays are eager for a more efficient measure to analyze and manage. Fortunately, the evolutionary progress in sensors offers us the access to data with higher fidelity, enhanced timeliness and unprecedent abundance. Subsequently, researchers see the potential of data-driven methods in the realm of transportation science.

Traffic forecasting and traffic state estimation(TSE) are the most extensively discussed topic in intelligent transportation system studies. In 2000s, researchers rely on the traffic prediction models incorporated with fluid dynamic models. Although the behavior of traffic flow complies the laws of hydrodynamics intuitively, the models are only functioning in ideal situations under strict and impractical conditions such as the targeted road network should have no ramps or circles. As road networks has got more complicated than ever, traditional methods become impotent to sketch the underlying pattern of the traffic. Therefore, in the last decade, the academic has been shift their efforts towards machine learning and its recent variants, Deep Learning(DL) algorithms. And follow-up works showed breathtakingly excelling performance over previous methods. 

Despite of higher accuracy and robustness of recent works in DL, traffic forecasting and TSE are still lack of efficient solution in practical applications. Firstly, most of the works still manage to solve the puzzle in a "tiny" traffic network which only cover up to a few blocks of the city. Due to the exploding size of the neural network and the complexity of problems of traffic forecasting itself, current methods require a large amount of computation resources which leaves time-sensitive applications nearly impossible to realize. Secondly, the low interpretability of MLP-based methods compromises the authenticity of the results from a decision maker perspective. For most of the prevailing methods, the importance of how much the results make sense to users is usually overlooked. As a science usually provides profoundly crucial advice influencing a great portion of society, transportation usually raises what-if analysis and values the solidness of conclusion sometimes over performance. Thirdly, transportation science always dedicates to enhancing the quality of traffic and life for every corner of the world. Considering that many cases of areas on the planet suffer from insufficient training models and even historical traffic data, transferability of deep learning framework is also an urgent as well as promising direction. Previous works neglect the replicability of training models in different cases yet this capability is a meaningful topic with high priority in practical implementations. Lastly, all the data-driven methods share the similar weak obedience to the domain knowledge. Although traditional methods built upon hydrodynamics is not believed efficient, some results contradicting common-sense drawn from DL methods indicate that it is still necessary to introduce domain knowledge into learning framework as basis. 

[Hypothesis methods summary]

In my following work, I am going to introduce some iconic DL methods in a chronical manner as well as a novel framework of DL potentially capable of improve current methods. And then, a discussion of my proposed method will follow where I will also bring up currently foreseeable problems and limitation of it. 

## Related works

**Graph Neural Network in traffic forecasting**. During the last decade, researchers keep harness the power of deep learning in traffic forecasting to develop flexible, large-scale, and real-time estimation models. However, traditional deep learning models may neglect some interesting properties of transportation networks. For instance, most recent studies using traditional deep learning architectures have used convolutional operators to consider spatial dependencies among data points. While due to the special characteristics of transportation networks, the spatial correlations are not necessarily distributed in Euclidean space. More specifically, imagine there are a railway close to a highway yet in parallel to it. Although they are near to each other in Euclidean distance, these two elements should be categorized into two different transportation system with little spatial correlations. This is where GNNs change the game. Incorporating graph structure into learning process, it turns out GNN is powerful to capture features traditional methods failed to. One of the first attempts comes from the work by Shahsavari[R]. He proposed a graph-oriented model for considering the spatial-temporal correlations between data captured by sensors. In this framework, nodes correspond to the location of sensors with features such as traffic flow, density and speed, and edges represent spatial interrelations forced by the network topology such as length, capacity and direction. Finally, a GNN model is trained in a supervised learning approach to predict short-term future traffic conditions. This work by Shahsavari is exemplified and used as a general framework for following works. Upon the initial attempts towards graph-based learning, later works can be generally categorized into three genres: recurrent GNNs, convolutional GNNs, as well as graph autoencoders and adversarial GNNs. STGCN(spatial-temporal graph convolutional network) was proposed in 2018 by incorporating the convolution operator in the GNN model. STGCN consists of two spatial-temporal convolutional blocks, followed by a fully connected layer. This method is an iconic GNN scheme with conspicuous improvement comparing to baseline such as LSVR, FC-LSTM, FNN, and etc. And STGCN is also the popular baseline method for recent works. Later, Zhao et al.[R] integrated gate recurrent units and graph convolutional networks and proposed T-GCN. It is designed to capture the topological structure of traffic networks while considering spatial dependencies using a GCN. And in 2022, Shin and Yoon[R] proposed a multi-weight traffic graph convolutional network utilizing multi-weighted adjacency matrices for combining more features such as speed limit, distance and the angle between road segments. Moreover, the Seq2Seq model with LSTM units is included to learn temporal relationships from weighted graph convolution. Later, Cui et al. [R]combined the idea of graph convolutional methods and long-short term memory neural network and proposed a SOTA method, namely TGC-LSTM. Defining the neighborhood matrices and the free flow reachability matrix, they captured the graph edge properties and high-order neighborhood in the traffic graph. Recently, the efforts have been shifted to attention-based methods to consider the dynamic temporal dependencies. It begun as Guo et al.[R] developed an attention-based spatial-temporal graph convolutional network model(ASTGCN). The model consisted of three independent components for hourly, weekly and for weekly time intervals. And each components is followed by graph convolutions for capturing spatial patterns and standard convolutions for describing temporal features. Based on ASTGCN and inspired by encoder-decoder, Pan et al.[R] proposed ST-MetaNet, a spatial-temporal meta graph attention network for multi-step traffic forecasting. ST-MetaNet consisted of RNN for embedding the sequence of historical data; a Meta-knowledge learner for learning nodes and edges attributes; Meta-GAT for capturing spatial correlations from metaknowledge; and a Meta-RNN for capturing temporal correlations from meta-knowledge. Later in 2022, Chen at al.[R] argued that previous models only consider limited and static external factors into account. Therefore, AARGNN, an attentive attributed recurrent GNN is proposed. AARGNN considers multi static and dynamic factors during the forecasting process. More specifically, they considered road network topology, driving distance, points of interest, road physical properties and incident data as the link-level features; traffic state data as the node-level feature, and weather and data information as the graph-level features. An attention mechanism is also used to identify the contribution of each factor to the prediction tasks. AARGNN showed better accuracy in comparison to SOTA models such as DCRNN, TGC-LSTM and GMAN[R].

**Deep learning in traffic state estimation(TSE)**. Although focus on distinct objectives, TSE and traffic forecasting share many similar methodologies in research. Like the field of traffic forecasting, researches in TSE also transferring their attention to GNNs. For TSE, all methods can be generally categorized into three domains: the model driven approaches, the data-driven approaches and physical-informed deep learning(PIDL) approaches. In model-driven methods, researchers utilize traffic flow models(usually based on fluid dynamics) to predict and estimate traffic states. The commonly used models are based on conservations laws, including the LWR model[R], ARZ model[R] and METANET model[R]. The data-driven approaches utilize a large volume of real-world traffic data for analysis and modeling, and researchers also use methods such as STGCN[R], DCRNN[R] mentioned above. The model-based methods is notorious for the complexity of model and incapability of capturing features comprehensively. Although the data-driven methods overcome the drawbacks of model-based ones, the data-driven models requires high-quality and a sufficient amount of data which are rare in practical scenarios. Often due to sparce data, the data-driven methods likely produce the results that are difficult to be explained with domain knowledge, even sometimes nonsense. Therefore, researchers combine two types of methods and propose PIDL approaches. Compared to conventional statistical or model-based methods, PIDL can be better utilize traffic physics information to improve the accuracy and prevision of traffic state estimation. In 2021, Shi et al. proposed deep learning paradigm which combines Physics-informed deep learning(PIDL) and a  fundamental diagram(FD) learner, namely PIDL-FDL. Shi et al. managed to solve popular first-order and second-order traffic models with PIDL-FDL and reconstructed the FD relation as well as model parameters outside FD terms. And in 2023, Zhang et al.[R] improved PIDL-FDL by introducing a computational graph framework. The parameters of FD embedded into the computational graph are determined after froward propagation on variables and backward propagation on error. And PIDL scheme with Greenfields FD was employed to realize TSE. The author claimed this new method can excel previous methods in the tasks suffering from data sparsity. Some may argue the PIDL methods are not typical physics-based since the framework is more of a PDE approximation rather than a realization of rigid physical model.[R] So, the value of PINN and PIDL to nature and social science are under debate in academia.

**Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks(KAN)**. KAN is a recent study introduced by Liu et al.[R], a novel neural network architecture designed to potentially replace traditional MLPs. Mathematically, MLPs are based on the approximation with a high-rank polynomial, while KAN is based on Kolmogorov-Arnold Representation Theorem which claims that all the function can be approximated with sum of finite number of univariate functions.[R] Based on KART, Liu et al. proposed a neural network framework by substituting linear weights with spline-based univariate functions along the of the network, and the functions are specifically structured as learnable activation functions. Author claims KANs offer a solution to limitation of efficiency and interpretability in MLPs. In their examples, Liu et al. claims the network can produce a parametric explanation of results based on the topological structure of the network, meanwhile users are able to interact with the network by manually adjusting every learnable functions to tune or test the neural network. Besides, author highlighted the size of KAN is generally significantly smaller than MLPs. Inspired by KANs, on June 19th, Zhang et al.[R] proposed a solution for graph neural network based on KANs by message passing framework into KAN. In the result, GraphKAN, comparing to graph convolution network, had higher accuracy in accuracy while the computation time was 25 percent more. But, GraphKAN successfully showcased a new option for GNN framework for transportation field. {Will add a little bit more to Graph KAN and TKAN} Furthermore, the DL community subsequently introduced Temporal-KAN(or TKAN) and Time-series KAN which focus on the forecasting with time-series data. As we recall the GNNs methods in traffic forecasting and TSE, KAN is very likely to have new species in recent future. But, KAN is still controversial in many aspects. Researchers claim that KAN generally suffer from an apparently larger loss than MLP-based neural networks. And the accuracy is not satisfying in the variants such as GraphKAN and Time-series KAN. Therefore, it is safe to say that KAN has a long way to walk to replace MLPs. But, it has only been two months after the release of KANs, so I think it is still too early to draw the conclusion of KANs. 